* The code doesn't match the text. The paper refers to a canopy component
  model, but glidersim doesn't have a `ParagliderCanopy` class; the logic from
  that section of the paper (stuff like calculating the extra mass due to the
  ribs) is in `ParagliderWing`

* Regarding coefficients, one source of definition is "Flight Vehicle
  Aerodynamics" (Drela; 2014), p.208, where they use `{Cx, Cy, Cz, Cl, Cm, Cn}`

  Then you've got the classic CL/CD (Cza and Cxa, respectively). The conflict
  with section vs wing `CL` is a compelling argument for `CL'` or whatnot.


Content
=======

* Record the momentum derivatives for Barrows in the derivation. It wasn't
  clear from the paper exactly how those worked.


Drafting
--------

* **Define the concrete "key ideas" for the paper.** These will drive how
  I develop the entire paper, both in structure and content.

* Write an informal overview of the goal, problems, resources, and solutions.
  Avoid technical details; fill those in later.

* Write an "introduction to the introduction". **Don't make the reader wait
  a long time to understand my contribution.**

* Draft a full abstract.

* Draft a full introduction.

* Review each section has adequately defined assumptions. You need to establish
  the assumptions and constraints of your method to make sure you don't
  overpromise.

* Annotate the informal draft with **text-only** descriptions of good
  supporting material (figure descriptions, equations, code references, etc.)
  Don't worry about actually producing those elements; this is about
  establishing a pathway to a cohesive structure: once you know what elements
  you really want, only then should you spend time creating them.


Feedback
^^^^^^^^

Summary of Bridget's comments from `2021w42`:

* The goal of the thesis is to:

  1. Put the project into plain terms

  2. Provide details for future work building a paragliding flight simulator

* Regarding putting the project into "plain terms":

  * Motivation for the project - describe paragliding and what paragliders
    (and you in particular) need / desire

  * Existing technology - describe what paragliding models / simulators
    currently exist and what is lacking from these

  * Your contribution - describe what your contribution is and distinguish
    how it is different / similar to existing models/devices. It would also
    be helpful to include a top level system block diagram showing the main
    input and outputs of the system (I am currently unclear as to what the
    output is - positional data (i.e. a track)?)

  * An overview of the sections of your thesis so the reader will understand
    the organization of your chapters. My understanding is that you spend
    two whole chapters describing the model for the geometry (chapter 2) and
    aerodynamics (chapter 3) of the foil and then spend a chapter on the
    models of the 3 main components of the paraglider system (canopy,
    suspension lines and harness). What is unclear to me here is how does
    the canopy of chapter 4 differ from what you described in chapters 2 and
    3 (or is it just a particular instance of a foil). Then chapter 5 is
    about modeling the system as a whole, and chapter 6 is a case study that
    tests the performance/accuracy of the system model. It might also be
    useful to include somewhere in the intro (perhaps near the start as you
    are describing the motivation) how that even though you are a computer
    engineering student, the thesis delves into math, statistics, flight
    dynamics, etc. - all of which you had to learn before you could use your
    computer engineering skills to program your implementation

* **At the start of each chapter, provide a paragraph about why this chapter
  is important and how it fits into the whole thesis document.**

* "I kept wanting the document to tell me how your design differed / was the
  same as existing designs. For example, I know air foils have been modeled
  before (as well as paragliding wings) - so for your design choices, how
  much of it was based on an existing design and how much of it did you
  modify/create (some of your square bracket remarks seemed to hint at this,
  but I would like to see it more explicitly stated)."

* Chapter 6 (Demonstration)

  "What exactly is the output of the model?"

  "Just describe what it currently does and the limitations it has."

* "Focus on communicating your contributions in a way that someone like me,
  Lynne, and Marty (who don't have the background in flight dynamics and
  stats) can understand what you did." (ie, "more intro paragraphs to each
  section and subsection")


References
----------

* Create a list of topics relevant for "prior art" papers (paraglider dynamics,
  wind field estimation, thermal estimation, etc)

* Create a list of sources for each topic, including summary notes


Scripts
-------

* The figures will largely be generated by `matplotlib` scripts. They must all
  use consistent styling. How should I define and apply that configuration?
  A project-local `matplotlibrc`? A Python script that the figures import and
  execute?

* In `generate_canopy_examples.py`, there's a function `_plot_foil` that
  appears to duplicate `gsim.plots.plot_foil`. Why does it exist?

* Factor out the canopy plotting function from the thesis script
  `generate_canopy_examples.py` (the one with the faux grid). I'd like to use
  it to to plot my Hook3ish


Figures
-------

* If I can't use the moment coefficient output for XFLR5 then what's the point
  in including it for the other coefficients? Should I remove it? Kinda weird
  for it to be on some plots but not others.

* Remove the `figures/data` folder (has the vario alignment stuff)

* I need a diagram for the 6 DoF model. I was going to just show the body
  centroid "B", but that makes it less obvious that the 6 DoF supports weight
  shift. Should all models include "P"? While I'm at it, is "B" still a good
  choice?

* Add author and license to my SVG metadata (Inkscape -> Document Properties)

* Figure labels must be globally unique, so standardized label prefixes would
  probably help. Could be based on the content of the figure (the specific
  object, or that object's domain) or the section that contains the figure.

  At the least, it seems like a reasonable that **labels should match the
  figure filename.** This will probably preclude using section names, since
  I want to avoid renaming figure filenames if the sections change.

  While I'm at it, **the figure sources should match the figure labels** as
  well. It should be obvious where a figure came from (within reason)

* Remove scratch/unused figures (eg, `elliptical_arc_dihedral.svg`)

Belloc
------

* Record the software versions used to generate the SVG files

* Ask Belloc if I can publish the wind tunnel data in the public repo

* Add the pseudo-inviscid CL vs CD (builds confidence in the method and
  implementation)

* Eliminate the yucky resampling logic in `belloc.py:InterpolatedArc`
  Related: why do I use a `PchipInterpolator`?

* Document the coefficients I'm plotting in Belloc. I'm using `CZa` etc, which
  means I'm plotting coefficients with respect to the wind axes. I forget why
  I chose to do that, except (that appears) that's what XFLR5 computes? On the
  bright side, I'm already using the T1 (moments wrt the CG).

* The arc curvature isn't too extreme in `belloc`, but not zero. How much
  "excess" wing is there due to overlap/underlap on the lower/upper surfaces
  between the linear wing segments?

  Compare the chord area to the upper and lower areas. For the chord area, use
  the Phillips instance variables `dl * c_avg * curve_length`, where
  `curve_length` is the length of the upper or lower airfoil surface (which
  assume a chord length of 1)


Editorial
=========


Writing Style
-------------

* Choose a voice

  * Passive vs active (I strongly lean towards active, but be consistent)

  * "We will", "I will", "this paper will", etc?

* Eliminate crutch words like "simply", "just", etc


Notation, math, etc
-------------------

* Give examples of vectors (position, velocity, linear momentum, angular
  momentum, derivatives, etc)

* Add a description of a *direction cosine matrix* to `symbols`? Or maybe the
  `glossary`?

* Although Steven's notation uses `F` and `M` for forces and moments, I want to
  be consistent that vectors are lowercase-bold. Instead, I'm using Hughes'
  style of lower `f` and `g` for forces and moments, relying on subscripts for
  disambiguation; naked `\vec{g}` is a well-established convention for gravity,
  moments are `\vec{g}_b2R` ("body with respect to reference point `R`")

  The exception is in Phillips' method, where I use `dF` to maintain
  consistency with the paper.

* When do you need to specify a reference frame in my mathematical notation?
  (Only when taking vector derivatives, I think; see `notes-202048:Math`)

* I'm getting sick of `\mathrm` for all the points (like
  `r_{\mathrm{P}/\mathrm{LE}}`). Can I write a latex macro that will wrap them
  for me?


Terminology
-----------

* There is a lot of confusion/ambiguity regarding *anhedral*. You might refer
  to the angle between the y-axis and the position of the section, or you might
  be referring to the section roll. I'm leaning towards reserving "anhedral"
  for "angle between y-axis and section position", since you talk about "arc
  anhedral" which clearly refers to the POSITION arc, not the roll angle. So,
  I guess `\Gamma` is that position angle, `\gamma` is the roll angle.

* Should I define a Sphinx role for terms/definitions? There's already
  a `:term:` role that requires they be in a glossary, but what about in-line
  definitions with no entry in the glossary? (They compile with a warning and
  render as normal text; no good.)


Structural
----------

* Make sure all the chapters follow the same structure
  (see `meta/editing:Content:Chapter structure`)

* For unnumbered chapters like "Glossary" and "Symbols", I'm using the ``..
  only::`` directive to specify the chapter titles. I have to do that because
  if I use regular section headings, the latex builder will set them as
  numbered.

  This current way works, but you can't have sections in those chapters: if
  you try, they'll all be marked as chapters, as if the original chapter
  heading doesn't exist. It confuses both the HTML and latex builders. I think
  `.. only::`` is "not meant for structural elements", so that makes sense,
  but I'm not sure how to fix this. For now, just don't use sections in
  unnumbered chapters.

* You can add ``:numbered:`` to the ``toctree`` to get section numbers in
  HTML, and it will automatically use ``<sec#>.<eq#>`` for equation
  cross-references, but I get some errors about "already assigned section
  numbers" when building HTML.

* The HTML builder doesn't label the appendices as appendices (it doesn't
  label them with an alphabetical sequence); might need to just handle them
  manually (explicit labels in HTML, explicit `\appendix` entry for the latex
  output).

  The (small) problem is that for the HTML builder (so no appendix chapter
  labels) ``:numref:`` has no chapter, so it references out-of-section tables
  as "Table 1" even though it should be "Table A.1", etc.


Formatting
----------

* I wish I could use tables without borders for aligning sets of items. Do
  I *ever* want tables with borders? If not, I might be able to just redefine
  the `tabulary` environment. I think I can specify my own template
  `tabulary.tex_t`. The one with Sphinx is in `sphinx/templates/latex` I'd also
  need some CSS to fix the HTML tables...

* Check headings for consistent capitalization (title case or sentence case).
  Leaning towards sentence case.

* Verify against Cal Poly formatting

  * ref: http://www.grad.calpoly.edu/masters-thesis/masters-thesis.html

* Code literals (``like this``) are gray shaded in HTML, but have white
  backgrounds in the PDF. I tried setting ``'sphinxsetup':
  "VerbatimColor={rgb}{0.25,0.25,0.25}"`` in ``conf.py``, but that didn't seem
  to work. In the TeX output it looks like code literals are inside
  ``\sphinxcode`` elements; might start there?

* The "REFERENCES" link in the PDF is one page too high.

* The REFERENCES in the PDF should come *before* the appendices?


Bibliography
^^^^^^^^^^^^

* What label does Sphinx use with ``:ref:`` to link between sections? Does
  CalPoly require me to cite section **numbers**? I think sphinx typically
  substitutes section labels.

* Can my bibliography link backwards to sections that reference them? (That
  functionality is available in latex, but I forget how.)

* I think I can use multiple bibliographies. This might be useful since my
  topics are so varied. Should I?

  See: `<https://sphinxcontrib-bibtex.readthedocs.io/en/latest/usage.html>`_.

* Should I use "Lastname, Firstname"? See `thesis/notes/Notes 2019-W45`

* Do I need to redefine ``\bibsection`` in the Latex style? Do the "Memoir"
  defaults meet the style guidelines?

* Why does latex reorder my bibliography chapter to the end, after the
  appendices?


Publishing
----------

* Publish to Zenodo, add *concept DOI* to README, add DOI to `pfh.glidersim`
  documentation

* Do I need `sphinx.ext.githubpages`? What does it do?

* Low priority: add `sphinx.ext.linkcode` once `glidersim` is up on Github?

  https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/blob/main/doc/sphinxext/github_link.py


Development
===========

* Use `pip-compile --generate-hashes`? See
  https://pip.pypa.io/en/latest/cli/pip_install/#hash-checking-mode


Sphinx
------

* Eliminate `tex/pwasu.sty`? Don't think I need it anymore.

* Add `sphinx-sitemap`

* Add `sphinxext.opengraph`

* Furo in dark mode breaks SVGs with white backgrounds. Review figures and add
  white backgrounds where necessary for dark mode.
